# Data Visualization Final Report
### Team members: Tia Tang, Hailey Jeong, Rebecca Li. Gloria Deng

  
#### Introduction: 

Female employment is an important issue in the topic of the women's rights movement. Back in the days when females were treated as inferior to the male population, they had limited or no legal right to possess property or faced extremely high barriers or limitations in the job market. Managing female employment at a high level is important because it shows their status in the job market and their status in society as equal human beings. It also shows how much a country supports women's freedom to choose the pathway they want and has an appropriate legal framework and protection to back up their decision. It is also a matter of issue because females are more vulnerable to external shock, leading to a high unemployment rate. Especially in this pandemic era, concerns arise toward the female's status in the job market and their economic security.

For our project, we are interested in examining the different aspects of women's employment status and whether COVID has any significant impact on them. How does the employment rate change for men and women comparatively? What is the relationship between marital status and employment rate? Are we able to predict the employment status of a woman based on her demographics, nationality, marital status, and age? What are the possible influences of COVID on women's employment? How do the statistics differ between pre-covid and post-covid? These are all questions that we are interested in exploring with our visualizations. As our society is slowly getting back on track from the influence of COVID-19, we hope that through our visualization, we are able to highlight potential factors and solutions that can be utilized to better assist women in the workforce.

#### Related Works:

Before actually implementing our own project, our team researched related works around women's employment in general. Many previous works have shown that women's involvement in the labor market has changed in several notable ways over the past several decades. For example, women became much more likely to pursue higher levels of education: from 1970 to 2018, the proportion of women ages 25 to 64 in the labor force who held a college degree quadrupled, whereas the proportion of men with a college degree about doubled over that time. Women also have become more likely to work full-time and year-round. In addition, women's earnings as a proportion of men's earnings have grown over time. But, most of the research conducted around women's progress in the workplace are before COVID-19.

It's no doubt that the pandemic has affected all of us tremendously, but some studies have shown that women in the workforce were affected more.  In "[The Impact of COVID-19 on Gender Equality](https://www.nber.org/papers/w26947.pdf)" (National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 26947, April 2020), researchers Titan Alon, Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey, and Michèle Tertilt suggest that more women in the United States will have lost their jobs because the industries they tend to work in have been harder hit by the effects of the pandemic. This study also suggests that the coronavirus shutdowns have closed schools and daycare centers around the country, keeping kids at home and making it even harder for parents (especially mothers who tend to provide the majority of childcare) to keep working. These two points provided a solid starting point for our own project and helped us narrow down the research. The Women's Bureau of the U.S. The Department of Labor and U.S. The Bureau of Labor Statistics is also a great foundational data hub to conduct domain research and gather data. It provides solid datasets and preliminary data visualizations around women's employment status across time, race, occupation, etc.

#### Methods:

In terms of methods, we first looked at different datasets and previous research done by other institutions such as the Mckinsey report or the United Nations, to get better insight into the female's employment status and learn what kind of resources are there for us to weave them into our own narrative. While we tried to mostly use the US Bureau of statistics dataset for the credibility of sources, we used datasets from a survey undertaken by smaller institutions, such as the pew research group. After collecting resources, we discussed and settled an overall narrative structure, which would be categorized into four sections. In the first section, we wanted to show the gender disparity in employment status that persisted for a long time to convey the discrimination existent in the workplace. In the second section, we tried to suggest that women have been fighting this gap and actually managed to achieve some progress as the long-term employment rate increased over time. The third section showed how Covid 19 has damaged this progress and aggravated women's employment status. Lastly, we analyzed why the effect of covid 19 was detrimental on them and suggested solutions to prevent the effect of the economic downturn caused by the shock, such as the pandemic on female employment in the future. Then, we designated different sections for each team member, and we individually added a more detailed narrative and created visualizations. Then, in the next interim meeting, we critiqued our visualizations together and saw what kind of narrative or evidence is missing from our article. We gave feedback to the narrative and the design, so we iteratively improved our article over a few interim meetings. Also, looking at the overall narrative on how females' struggle in the workplace and how covid 19 affected their status, we discussed solutions to prevent the effect of the economic downturn caused by the shock, such as the pandemic on female employment in the future and made visualizations accordingly. Also, in terms of creating visualizations, we first started in Figma for planning. Then, initially, we thought of making visualizations through Observable and vega-lite. Still, due to the difficulties of embedding them into HTML files, we used other tools such as Tableau and Infogram.

#### Results:

As a result, we discovered insights relating to females' employment status. The surprising discovery was that females' employment rate was actually increasing in the long term in the US. Although female representation in senior positions in different companies was significantly low, their proportions increased, which could be seen as a meaningful change. However, the impact of Covid 19 was huge, as their unemployment rate spiked in such a short amount of time to 15%, which is an unprecedentedly high rate. As we analyzed why this happened, we learned that most of the female workers are, in fact, working as part-time workers because they have limited options in a job market that prefers male candidates over female candidates. As a result, their position as an employee is vulnerable, as they are the ones who get fired easily in the economic downturn. The resultant economic insecurity is very concerning. Moreover, another reason that the covid impacted females severely was that women take responsibility for childcare more than men do, and the impact of lockdown and remote education made women unable to carry out work and childcare at the same time. Furthermore, from the research, we discovered that the governmental support to resolve these two factors that make females vulnerable at recessions is significantly lacking. First of all, the US government's investment in family benefits is actually decreasing since 2010, which also correlates with the number of employed females. The data suggests that the government should increase its GDP spending on supporting childcare. Also, additional research showed that the US government has no policy in terms of guaranteeing a part-time worker's status. Considering that the majority of part-time workers are female, they should endeavor to pass legislation that can ensure their financial security, such as making sure the employer has to communicate their intent of dismissal at least three months before or provide a discharge allowance to the fired workers.

#### Note on Accessibility:

One of the reasons we used Infogram as our visualization tool was that it supported accessibility functions for screen reading. However, it didn't work for some reason, so we had to give up on this functionality. But we want to further improve the accessibility of our article by adding alternative text to ease out the screen reader. Also, our designs took people with color blindness into account, using a web application, Coblies, a color blindness simulator that we used to see how our design would look to the people with such color deficiency. Other than that, we tried to maintain a high color contrast ratio, using a color contrast checker. We also added labels, titles, and instructions to each visualization to better communicate the content of our article to the readers.

#### Discussion:

As the US society advocates for and aims to approach gender equality and balance in the workforce, the figure shows that more and more women are employed and take more senior positions in recent years. However, the entry level gender ratio seems to achieve a fifty-fifty ratio. C-suite is dominated by men power due to marriage, baby sitting, and continuation of men power. Smaller profit oriented organizations tend to provide less security to mothers which hurts the employability of women, so the government should impose policy to protect parental roles for leaving mothers and day-off for fathers to take care of the newborn babies as well.

Based on the unemployment rate pre and post-COVID for female population, 69% percentage of part-time workers are female. Part-time workers normally do not pay for 401k and are more susceptible to being fired when the company faces a crisis and wishes to cut down labor costs. Also, most of the part-time jobs require low-skilled labor which is easy to find substitutes compared to high-skilled workers due to the lasting talent acquisition process and training sessions to new employees. Higher education is surely a good investment for stability and job security for women, because well-developed corporations normally have more funding to support female workers and offer diversity programs to ease the stress of competing against advantageous groups.

Amongst other developed countries, the US government provided little support to ensure equal treatment of regular workers. Therefore, the diversity programs are largely initiated by private firms voluntarily and normally cannot benefit low-skilled workers. The US senate should advocate for federal law to encourage more equal employment opportunities across all the 50 states to guarantee more protection for low-skilled workers and opportunities that suit their skill sets.

#### Future Works:

We want to refine our data visualization charts into a visual design system, including consistent format and same colour patterns from the design perspective. We want to make some polishing and iteration for some diagrams to deliver the information in higher efficiency. Because of the limitation of coding experience, we used Tableau and Infogram most of the time, setting many constraints for the interaction. We want to refine our website to automatically display the data changes when scrolling the page, leveraging the D3 library.

From the data analysis perspective, we want to extend the research into the multi factors which affect the women's unemployment rate during covid. Since we have mentioned several reasons that have a higher possibility of causing unemployment, such as child care issues and the cut down in some industries, we still need more data to prove the conclusions. Besides quantitative analysis, we would like to extend qualitative visualization data, such as the word cloud.

We hope our website can draw more people's attention to the unfair treatment of women's employment during the pandemic under the easy-to-understand narrative. We want to post it and share it on social media to bring more impact.
